From Herb D posting to Interoperability 20160922

There’s an EMS front end that handles the election data gathering (can be uploaded and/or manually entered), ballot layout (used in  electronic display and/or printing of paper ballots) , file creation for the voting/tabulation devices and placing the needed files on the media used by the various tabulation/voting devices. 
 
The tabulating devices are either paper ballot tabulators (precinct or central with central being a hopper fed device as precinct can be used as a central) or electronic voting devices of which there are 3 kinds.  A BMD which produces a paper ballot that identifies all candidate selections which must then be processed by a paper tabulator, a DRE which is self contained voting and tabulating unit (whether or not it has a peripheral paper trail for audit) and a hybrid unit which creates the paper like a BMD but then reads and tabulates the paper. The tabulating units aggregate valid votes from the cast ballots and produce local reports summarizing these aggregated votes.  Results information is placed on media for system wide aggregation.  Some tabulation units have the ability (although not EAC certified for this) to transmit results over common carrier wired or wireless connections.  All DREs as well as more current paper tabulators produce Cast Vote Records.  These are used for internal aggregation of device results that are reported as device results after the polls close.  None of these are “raw voter selections” although the paper ballot tabulator may store these in some way associated with the CVR.   Note that older paper ballot tabulators just kept aggregated results derived/tabulated from the scanned ballot. 
 
Lastly there is the EMS back end which performs the system wide aggregation for results from the various sources and produce results reports in various forms including paper, electronic versions of the paper or export files to meet jurisdiction or state requirements. 
 
So now, we need to consider how the Voting System (defined above) interacts with the Election System (which contains things like VR, Pollbooks, UOCAVA, etc.) in the workflow that executes the election process.   States certify statewide candidates, counties certify candidates, any local election officials certify candidates.  These all must be collected in the front end of the voting system along with the contests and the districts that the candidates are associated with.  VR systems provide the districts, precincts and splits along with the districts that make up the splits.  Some provide contest information as well.  Contest information must also contain district and party (in a primary) as well as the number to be elected.  Once all relevant data is collected, the EMS can perform its task.  So CDF can provide a consistent way of handling the data for uploading into the EMS.
 
Generally, voting units are prepared and tested in a warehouse to stage machines for delivery.  Machines usually have static firmware/software that uses an election definition to customize its operation for a specific election.  This election definition is contained on the media that was created by the EMS.  Generally the creation and storage of the files on the media entails the use of security measure such as file signing and encryption.  Also preparing the devices for use of these encrypted and signing involves a method of installing keys and/or use of security media. 
 
There is a logic and accuracy test process for ensuring the correct setup of the election that uses pre-audited stacks of voted ballots that were created from the artwork produced by the EMS.  These results are processed thru the system to ensure that it correctly performs end-to-end.  Part of this L&A process is a Public Test (in all states that I’m familiar with) which is published and allows public witnessing of a portion of the L&A testing.  Machines are then zeroed of all results and sealed in preparation to shipping to the polls (for precinct based units).
 
Poll workers have procedures to ensuring that the machines that they will use are correctly prepared and are zero to start off with.  During the voting process there is monitoring of machine public counts with the poll book information whether manual or electronic.  At close of polls, results are placed on media in a secure fashion (appropriately packaged, encrypted and signed) and results are locally printed.  The media and a copy of the results are usually transferred to the central site along with paper ballots from the polling place in a secure fashion with chain of custody considerations.  Note that if paper ballots are used, there is a reconciliation of numbers of ballots by style originally shipped, voted and spoiled.  
 
Finally, the media is uploaded into the reporting system along with any results data from outside the system (UOCAVA, from other jurisdictions, etc.).  The reporting system aggregates the results and produces reports and export files for unofficial and ultimately official results.  Note that currently jurisdictions within a state must report results in a prescribed format to the state of either the entire election or the contests in the election that the state is responsible for.  Here’s where the ENR comes into play for establishing uniformity as these file formats currently differ dramatically state to state.  A CVR export file here is useful for auditing and mandatory for things like RCV use if the RCV functionality is not included in the reporting system.
